---
title: "Current listening: Peter Hook's \"Unknown Pleasures\" memoir"
description: "3/4ths of the way in via audiobook. Thoughts so far:  "
date: 2020-12-28T19:26:43.672Z
draft: false
categories: joy division studies
---
3/4ths of the way in via audiobook. Thoughts so far:

* Recommendation: if you have the option of listening to, instead of reading, a memoir/autobiography recounted by its author (not sure how well this works with other literary genres), you should choose that option. As with David Lynch's **Room to Dream**, I found greater enjoyment from consuming this as an oral history in the author's voice, laden with their particular inflections and emphasis; I imagine the print version would be less rich for lack of those dimensions.
* The book works as an often-funny, always-entertaining first-person chronicle of the band's experiences during a creatively fertile but harrowing, deprivation-and-struggle-filled period. It doesn't go much deeper, though, into the bigger ideas, drivers, and psychosocial undercurrents of the music. Which is fair enough; Hook's focus at the time was channeling inchoate anger into bass riffs that were essential components of the group's music, as well as (to his great lament) driving the van back and forth to gigs; his contribution was not that of a deeply-considered organizing set of principles or aesthetic behind Joy Division's sound. For first person accounts of that, you'd have to hear from Ian Curtis, and maybe Martin Hannett ... alas.
* An oddly enjoyable aspect here is "Hooky"'s constant aggrieved jabs at his erstwhile bandmate, Bernard Sumner (nicknamed "Barney"). "Oddly" because of all the group's personalities, Sumner's archetype matches most closely with my own (introverted, a bit fussy and uptight, with experimental and perfectionistic inclinations). There's a perverse fun in listening to Hook describe his dust-ups with Barney, and thinking "that's probably exactly how I'd have behaved in the same situation. I'd have been called a dick and they'd have been right, but still, I'd have had my reasons." It's easy for me to imagine some of Hook's same complaints about Barney running through the minds of those who've been frustrated with me in the past. At the same time, I've experienced plenty of my own frustrations with the Hookies of the world, so ... *c'est la vie.*
* As the book marches toward its inevitable tragic conclusion, a grim refrain seems to grow in frequency. The description of one gig will contain a sentence like *the lighting guy flipped on a strobe, causing Ian to have a violent fit on stage.* The next gig it will be, *Ian had been stressed and under-slept, and he ended up collapsing into the drum kit during that night's set. We had to drop our instruments and cradle his head as he shook, while a rain of insults poured down* *from the audience.* This is usually *not* followed by sentences that began, "After a visit to the doctor," or "After some time spent recovering," but instead straight on to a recounting of the next night's gig-slash-medical emergency, occurring under much the same conditions that produced the previous one. It's so hard to read because you know the crash is coming, and you see so many off-ramps to avoiding it. As I near the end of the book, I find myself bracing myself more and more and feeling increasing resistance to reading on.
* At the same time, it's hard to judge those in Curtis' orbit for failing to prevent his untimely end. Joy Division was a machine in motion, comprising a large number of people (most of them quite young at the time, including Curtis) with their roles in its workings, and none seemed to have been equipped with the insight or foresight to see the necessity of decisively intervening. That seems to also have included the medical establishment, along with Curtis himself—who by all accounts was as driven to continue with the band's punishing schedule and work ethic as anyone else, and might have refused any entreaties to slow down. The group was gaining in popularity and reaching new artistic heights; if the singer and driving force of the band maintained that his epilepsy and mental health issues were only minor concerns, the inertial tendency to rationalize the machine's continued movement would be understandably strong. Hook, to his credit, spares no self-criticism; it's because of his honesty and lack of attempts to deflect blame that we are able to empathize. Unfortunately, hearing his account, it ends up seeming hard to imagine that things might have ended up any differently, given the circumstances and state of awareness of all involved.